far in the north of Greenland a team of
climate scientists from 14 nations
including the US has just completed its
first season of drilling a 1.6 mile core
of solid ice JP Steffensen is the field
operations manager for the North
Greenland Eemian ice drilling project or
NIEM the project's ultimate goal to
unlock the climate history trapped
inside those tiny bubbles the beautiful
thing about an ice core is that it's got
all of these different indicators
atmospheric composition temperature mean
ocean temperature dust all these kinds
of indicators are on exactly the same
time skill jeff's every house a
scientist at the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography is working with new
scientists to reconstruct all those
indicators in the hope of learning more
about a period in climate history known
as the alien the Eemian period started
about a hundred and thirty thousand
years ago and we know it lasted about
fifteen thousand years before the earth
plunged back into an ice age neem is
really trying to get a record of the
last time that the earth was warmer than
today so it's an analogue for what our
future looks like under global warming
during the Eemian temperatures were
somewhere between five and nine degrees
Fahrenheit warmer than today a scenario
that climate models suggest could happen
again by the end of the century if
present trends continue it's a very very
realistic scenario for what we may
experience in the next 100 to 200 years
we're getting older and older with every
meter rerouting getting back to the Qt
30 feet below the surface in this huge
trench carved from the snow is where
this ice core research begins the newest
thing we have no no it NIEM that nobody
else has tried is a very sophisticated
analytical system it's called continuous
flow analysis we actually in the field
you cut a slab of the ice cores then you
authorize following the length of the
ice and you tilt that vertically and you
melt it on the hot plate for money and
and then as it melts you do the analysis
millimeter by millimeter the samples are
also cut bagged and boxed up and then
shipped to research centers around the
world we call it the post office the
logistics of ice core drilling are far
from simple it's just complicated and I
hate complications they like to obscure
run smoothly the operation starts in the
small town of Kangerlussuaq on
Greenland's west coast my first season
was in 1980 so that's 29 years ago and
that was a marriage for life keeping the
operation running smoothly is his wife
and fellow scientist door to Dahl Jensen
means project leader
the efforts to come the airplanes come
courtesy of the 109th Airlift Wing of
the New York Air Force National Guard
and pilots like George Alston but we're
the only unit in the world that flies
the specialized L c-130 aircraft of
c-130 on skis which allows us to support
the scientific efforts and take these
large airplanes and land them on skis
but getting to the ice drilling camp is
just part of the challenge it's always
light so when you first get here it may
be a little hard to sleep it takes a
couple of nights to get used to it but
then you get so tired from work and from
not sleeping the nights before that it
no longer becomes a problem Vasily
petrenko is a scientist at the
University of Colorado it's a very
simple life it's it's kind of like a
frontier outpost we sleep in mostly in
those red structures that you see behind
me
they're called weather ports while the
name field camp may look like a frontier
outpost on the surface Petrenko and
others are engaged in very sophisticated
scientific research underground one of
the things that we see in the ice cores
is a strong correlation between carbon
dioxide levels and temperatures so at
times of warm temperatures carbon
dioxide as high at times of cold
temperatures carbon dioxide is low which
you know reinforces what science has
been showing recently that carbon
dioxide does cause warming and that
warming leads to melting the Greenland
ice sheet contains enough ice to raise
global sea level by 23 feet a worst-case
scenario associated with global warming
satellite data from the NASA grace
mission show that Greenland's reservoir
of ice has plummeted in recent years
about 340 billion tons of ice melt in
2007 alone about the same as San
Francisco Bay draining completely every
week for a year scientists hope this new
ice core will tell them how much of
Greenland's ice melted during the Eemian
period when global sea level was 13 to
20 feet higher a finding that could be
crucial in determining how much and how
quickly sea level could rise over the
next several centuries
the other ice cross we've done that we
find ice from the Indian parrot in the
ice cores and of course this immediately
tells us that even though it was warmer
or between and it wasn't warm enough for
the whole thing as you to disintegrate
and that's you know something that's
debated a lot how much warming who need
in the future before the Queen I see it
went totally disappear before we go
beyond the tipping point now that this
drill season has come to an end the
scientists are heading home where they
will continue working to unlock the
climate history trapped inside those
tiny but telling bubbles